Plug in at LEAST a mouse and keyboard (USB).  If you have room, add wireless networking, but that's not super critical yet.

Boot your Pi from a recently formatted/created NOOBS image.  Even if you bought a system that came with a NOOBS installation SDCard, you might want to consider wiping and re-imaging it; otherwise, when you run the initial update after installation, the wait can be... "substantial"

Choose the operating system.  I prefer Raspbian.  Things should start setting up.  Go home and sleep.  Come back the next day...

You should now have a GUI to work with.  Great.  Use the following "diagram" to perform some basic setup tasks.
Click on the "Raspberry" symbol to the upper left of your screen.
--> Preferences
  --> Mouse & Keyboard Settings
    --> Keyboard (Tab)
      --> Keyboard Layout (Button)
        Choose "United States" as the country;  Choose "English (US)" as the Variant.  
        There is an area at the bottom of the dialogue where you can type some text to test.  DO check out some characters.  I was having problems with the "pipe" (|) character, and the single-quote character...
        Save and exit.
  --> Raspberry Pi Configuration
    --> System (Tab)
      --> Change Password (Button)
        Change your password.  The default/initial password is "raspberry"
    --> Interfaces (Tab)
      Click to Enable SSH from the menu.

Reboot the Pi.  If you did not have enough USB ports to start off with WiFi, turn off the pi, insert a WiFi wart into one of your USB ports, and restart.
You can "hot swap" a keyboard and mouse, but every time I've tried to plug in a WiFi wart it causes a rather abrupt system restart.  I don't know if this is dangerous, but why take a risk...

Setting up networking properly, with a static IP, depends on using the latest version of Raspbian.  Older builds used the interfaces file, whereas the newer versions focus on the dhcpcd.conf file
Most of the following was gleaned from this walkthrough:
http://raspberrypi.stackexchange.com/questions/37920/how-do-i-set-up-networking-wifi-static-ip-address

Upon reboot, you should see a WiFi indicator in the upper right corner.  Right-click it, configure the "SSID" and choose your connection of preference.
Clicking on the wifi indicator again should let you pick your network and enter the WPA password.
Verify that you can connect to the internet. (Open a web browser and go to a site, or something)

If you did not know the required information for setting up a static IP address, find that information now:
Open a command line interface (CLI) window and type the following:

  ip -4 addr show dev wlan0 | grep inet

The 2nd chunk of numbers that looks like an ip address is the broadcast address of the network
e.g.: inet 192.168.1.210/24 brd 192.168.1.255 scope global wlan0
For that output, "192.168.1.255" is your broadcast address


  ip route | grep default | awk '{print $3}'

This yields the address of your router/gateway
  
  cat /etc/resolv.conf
  
The value following "nameserver" is your DNS server address

Click on the wifi interface icon again, choose "interface" instead of "SSID" and select "wlan0".  Set up your static ip address there, using the information that you just gathered. 

running "ifconfig" now from the CLI, you should see the wlan0 interface associated with the ip address that you specified.

From the CLI, run the following, to update/upgrade all of your software

  sudo apt-get update -y
  ... {wait for a while...}
  sudo apt-get upgrade -y
  ... {wait for a while...}
  
There, you're basically up and running.  
Now set up SSH and VNC access so that you no longer have to have a mouse/keyboard (Next document)